# Intro Notes

- Discussion Questions
  - To get full credit on discussion question, you need to refer to a specific thing in the lecture
  - 72 hours after lecture to post question


# Marie Griffith: Religion on All Sides of the Abortion Debate

- Religiously motivated people have played important roles on _all sides_ of the abortion debate.
- <u>Religion (in this context)</u>
  - Christianity

- Backlash of equal rights amendment argued that women's full equality would lead to women being sort of demonic creatures.
> The church has always been opposed to the progress of women on the ground that it would lead her to immorality
- Using fear

A question asked by a student:
> how does the role of black and brown people being historically seen as inherently immoral impact this debate?

 
## History of Abortion
- Before late 19th century, practice of intentionally terminating human preganancy was very common. 
  - No state or federal laws that clearly forbade abortion
  - The view at the time: _An abortion prior to "quickening" was at most a misdemeanor (not a serious crime nor sin)_
    - <u>Quickening</u>
      - When women first felt the child
  - Medications to induce abortion were advertised across american media
    - In both mainstream papers and religous papers
  - In the 1800s, courts in many states, upheld the position that abortion prior to quickening was not a punishable defense

- In second have of the 19th century, abortion became increasingly outlawed
  - Not on religious grounds, but by physicians looking to professionalize medicine
    - 20% of pregnancy ended by abortion. Physicians began to spread stories of botched abortions, people dying of abortions.
    - Physicians spread the message that abortion was medically hazardous and morally wrong. 
      - They said the midwives shouldn't be doing it, that it should be performed by physicians.

- By 1900s, laws outlawing abortions were widespread (though with exceptions)
  - Greatest concern was "criminal abortions": abortions provided by non-licensed physicians
  - Birth control advocates of the period argued that the reason people need birth control access is to lower the abortion rate, to keep women safe.


- By the 1950s, growing number of professionals wanted to bring discussion of abortion into the open
- In 1955, Planned Parenthood convened a conference on abortion. 
  - Attracted a wide range of experts because they were concerned about "criminal abortion" and the problem of women dying by dangerous abortion
  - Called illegal abortion a "disease" in American society
  - They felt greater access to safe abortion was crucial in the United States.
    - PP began to advocate for increased abortion access

- Margaret Sanger (director of PP and organizer of the 1955 conference)
  - Later collaborated with eugenicists because they had lots of money and had their own interest in birth control.


- Planed Parenthood had a national clergyman's advisory council
  - Mostly protestant ministers/pastors and Jewish rabbis
    - not catholics because they had very different beliefs.
  - Were highly supportive of PP's position on birth control and abortion
  - By the early 60s, there were a few thousand pastors and rabbis signing statements promoting Planned Parenthood's positions on birth control and abortion
  - Started to question Christianity's condemnation of homosexuality
- 
- In 1967, the "Clergy confirmation service on abortion"
  - A council and referring service for women needing safe abortions _before they were illegal_
  - When New York made abortion legal, it was this group of pastors and rabbis that established the first abortion clinic in New York.
  - Their religious motivation was to alleviate women's suffering


- in the early 1970s 56% of catholics agreed that abortion should be legal
  - Because they saw the danger of _illegal_ abortion
- Both Democrats and Republicans were pretty much in agreement of decriminalizing abortion

- In 1976, the southern baptists affirmed their position that the government should stay out of private/individual business.
- Over the 1970s, fundamentalists took over the leadership. By 1980, new statements come out condemning abortion

- In many ways, the position became "Catholicized"
- These religious conservative groups opposed feminism vehemently. When abortion shifted from a health issue to a women's rights issue, the religious conservatives shifted their position to anti-abortion