# Introductions

- Instructor: Steve Cole (primary instructor)
- Instructor: Athena Tabakhi (co-instructor)


## Examples of problems
- <u>Shortest-path algorithm</u>
  - What's the shortest path between A and B.
- <u>Traveling salesperson</u>
  - What's the shortest path that visits `n` sites and returns to start?
- <u>Optimization</u>
  - What's the best way to allocate resources to solve a problem?
- <u>Factoring</u>
  - (like in math)
- <u>Halting</u>
  - This is an example of a problem where we can prove it's impossible to solve this problem
    - In other words, _there are problems a computer can't solve_
## What's an algorithm?
1. An "effective procedure"
   - implementable on a "computer"
   - Not all problems have an algorithm (e.g. Halting problem)
2. for taking any instance of a computational problem
   - Can't just ork for _some_ instances (restricted problem)
3. and finding a correct solution
   - Probably correct?
   - Almost correct?
   - For now: **always exactly correct**
## What makes an algorithm "good"?
1. Is it **correct**?
2. Is it **efficient?**
   - Resource consumption?
   - Running time?

## Formal Argument: proof by (strong) induction of a sorted element
PROVE: Selection sort correctly sorts lists
1. Selection sort correctly sorts lists of one element (base case)
2. Given an input list of `n` elements....
3. Algorithm removes the smallest element, puts it at start of output
4. Remaining input is list is one element smaller.
5. Assume that algorithm is correct for lists of < n elements (Inductive Hypothesis)
6. Then remaining input list is correctly sorted and placed _after_ smallest element in output