## The Behaviorists

- <u>John Watson</u>
- <u>B. F. Skinner</u>
  - Would never use the word "language"
    - Whenever he referred to "language", he'd say "Verbal Behavior"


- Psychology should be the science of behavior. Every other field of science is about what we can _observe_, so psychology should be the same!
- We should restrict the study of psychology to observable events (behavior) **and that's it**
- The goal: Predict and control behavior


### A few simple rules explain _all_ behavior
- <u>The Law of Effect</u>
  - Behaviors that are followed by positive consequences tend to be repeated. Behaviors followed by negative consequences tend not to be repeated.

## Psychoanalysis
- <u>Sigmund Freud</u>

- A direct reaction to behaviorists.
- Believed it was essential to study "unobservable events"
  - Wanted to study the mind, not just behavior
- Emphasized the importance of the unconscious
  - _how is unconscious revealed?_
    - Freud proposed hypnosis
    - Freud believed dreams could reveal the unconscious


## The Schools Today
- Structuralism
  - Gave rise to <u>Biological Psychology</u>
    - Study the cellular basis of behavior
- Functionalism
  - Gave rise to <u>Evolutionary Psychology</u>
    - What are the evolutionary advantages of certain kinds of behavior/psychological phenomenon
- Behaviorism
  - Was dominant 1920-early 1960s. 
  - Today, it's rare to find people who study the core of behaviorism
  - The most connected work is done in clinical psychology for treating phobias.
    - But for the most part, there are few _true_ behaviorists
- Psychoanalysis
  - Gave rise to <u>Cognitive Psychologists</u>
    - Want to study behavior, but also memory, emotions



## Nature vs. Nurture
- Nature
  - You're born with it.
- Nurture
  - Based on environment
- Examples
  - Conversion treatment for non-heterosexual, "non-typical"
    - B.S. (duh)


  - 