##

- How much control do you have over who you are?
- Why are you the way that you are?
  - Some element inherent within you?
  - Shaped by your invironment?


- <u>Behaviorists</u>
  - John Watson
  - B.F. Skinner
    - Said there are behaviors the get reinforced and behaviors that get punished
  - Beleived everything about a person is shaped by your environment

### What is learning?
- Associative Learning
  - <u>Classical conditioning</u>
    - Association of co-occurring stimuli
    - Behavior is reflexive and respondent: happens automatically
  - <u>Operant conditioning</u>
    - Association between action and its consequence
    - The learner is actively "operating" on their environment
- Two key dimensions of feedback
  - Does the feedback encourage or discourage behavior
    - Reinforcement
      - more likely to happen again
    - Punishment
      - less likely to happen again
  - Does the feedback add a stimulus or remove/avoid a stimulus?
    - Negative
      - Removing/avoiding a stimulus
    - Positive
      - Adding a stimulus


- Positive Reinforcement
  - adding a wanted stimulus increases a behavior
- Positive Punishment
  - Adding an unwanted stimulus decreases a behavior
- Negative Reinforcement
  - Removing an unwanted stimulus increases a behavior
- Negative Punishment
  - Removing a wanted stimulus decreases a behavior


### How is reward given
- In an experiemnts:
- <u>Operant chamber</u>
  - An environment where responses can be given, and all of the following can be produced
    - Positive and Negative reinforcement
    - Positive and negative punishment
    - Stimuli
    - Co-occuring stimuli
- <u>Reinforcement Schedules</u>
  - How often are you rewarded
  - Rules stating conditions necessary for reinforcement to occur
    - Punishment is not a perfect mirror of how learning is acquired/extinguished in reinforcement
  - <u>Continous</u>
    - Reward happens every time behavior is performed
    - Fastest to acquire
  - <u>Partial</u>
    - Reward does not happen every time behavior is performed
    - <u>Ratio</u>
      - Partial based on number of responses
    - <u>Interval</u>
      - Partial based on total time
  - Is response coming in a predictable way?
    - <u>Fixed</u>
      - Yes
      - Fastest to acquire
    - <u>Variable</u>
      - No
  - Mouse experiment (froot loops)
    - When rewards are contingent on number of responses, mice press lever more
    - When rewards are fixed, level is only pressed close to time of reward (they learn not to do behavior if they know they won't be rewarded)
    - When rewards are variable, they continue to press the lever, not knowing when they'll be rewarded.
  - Continuous, Fixed ratio are fastest to acquire. But extinguishes quickly once reward isn't given
  - Reinforcement linked to _number_ of responses (ratio) leads to _more responses_
  - Variabe schedules produce _highly consistent_ responding, resistant to extinction

- <u>Shaping</u>
  - Teaching complex behaviors via successive approximations
    - Rewarding more and more complex behavior
  - Animals can only learn to respond selectively to what they can discriminate differences between (<u>Discriminative stimuli</u>)
    - How do you find out that a dog is colorblind?
- <u>Primary, Secondary Reinforcers</u>
  - <u>Primary Reinforcers</u>
    - things that are _innately_ rewarding
      - Food, relaxing calmly
  - <u>Secondary Reinforcers</u>
    - Things that are associated with primary reinforcers
      - Money, priase, grades
      - Neutral stimuli that need to be associated with primary reinforcers through learning
  - Delayed gratification?
    - 