# More Studying Tips

## Reading the Textbook

- Providing context for the topics you're learning drastically increases both immediate and long-term recall
- To best remember the content:
  - Read the textbook all the way through twice
    1. First for context
    2. Second to take notes and highlight.

## Note-Taking

- Don't need to know _who_ conducted experiment
- Need to know the names and content of the experiments themselves

## Defining and describing psychology

- <u>Mind</u>
  - Can't externally directly get inside one's mind and learning about someone (introvert v. extrovert, for example)
    - You can learn about these things through observation of behavior
- <u>Behavior</u>
  - What is the behavior?
  - Why does certain behavior happen?
  - Combine behavior and subjective experience

## History of Psychology

- Before **1879**:
  - No discipline called Psychology existed.
  - Psychology (not called that) was part of Philosophy
  - The only recognition of mental "health" issues was in "mental asylums"
    - Often, these asylums charged admission to anyone to see the patients (like a zoo)
    - Up until the 1960s-ish, treatment of mental health issues got _worse_
      - Couldn't develop treatment until we understood the _causes_ of psychopathology

## Psychology in 2022

- Much broader scope with _lots of questions_:
  - How do we see in color?
  - How does personality develop?
  - How do babies develop language?
  - How do we learn best?
  - What are the techniques of good memory?
  - <u>Biological Psychology</u>
    - Biological Basis of behavior
    - _Could you tell whether someone will remember something just by looking at their brain?_
      - (yes)
  - <u>Social Psychology</u>
    - How groups influence our behavior
    - <u>Smoke in the room study</u>
      - In one condition, 96% of people leave the room when smoke begins to pour into the room
      - In one condition, 30% of people leave the room when smoke comes in
        - Why? What did they change?
          1. They added two other people into the room. The two didn't leave. (conformity)
    - <u>Developmental psychology</u>
      - Language acquisition
    - <u>Sensory Psychology</u>
      - Can you hear without any ears? (yes)
      - Does subliminal perception work? (No)
        - But what about the department store experiment?
          - Took a _very_ soft sound that said "Do not steal" on repeat
          - Compared departments with and without sound.
            - 40% less theft in the ones with sound. **but whyyyy???**
    - <u>Clinical Psychology</u>
      - THere has been a very recent revolution in treatment in psychopathology


## Evolution of Psychology

- Why study the history of Psychology?
  - It's a very young science
  - The perspectives, content, and approaches have changed
  - How did Psychology become the _SCIENCE_ of behavior and experiences?
    - Battle of the various schools of thought
      - Arguments over approaches
      - Arguments over content
        - At least one school of thought that believes Psychology should _not_ involve subjective experience (since you can't observe it, or see it, directly)
    - Everyone agrees that we need to use scientific principles (scientific method)


## Psychology schools of thought
[see notes for Module 1](Module%201.md#psychologys-first-schools-of-thought)