# Consciousness, Attention, and Sleep
#### _Dr. Emily Willroth_

- "The Hard Problem" in consciousness research
  - How do brain cells allow us to recall a memory, set goals for the future, hear sounds, tap to a beat

## Evolution of consciousness in Psychology
- Psychology is "the description and explanation of states of consciousness"
  - -- Ladd, 1887
- In the early/mid 20th century
  - Psychology becomes study of observable behavior
- Second half of 20th century
  - Neuroscience (new tech) makes studying consciousness popular in psychology again

## Cognitive Neuroscience
- Interdisciplinary study of brain activity linked with mental processes
### Key studies
- Soccer, Fink et al. (2009)
  - Participants thought about kicking a soccer ball
  - People who thought about kicking a ball in a creative way had more widespread brain activity than those who thought simply about kicking a ball into a net.
- Unresponsive patients
  - _Owen et al. (2006), Stender et al. (2014)
  - Asked unresponsive 23-year old women to image playing tennis
    - fMRI scans revealed activity in brain regions that would be responsible for arm and leg movements
    - Provided evidence for the idea that these unresponsive patients could hear and respond. Indicated conscious awareness.

_Can cognitive neurosciences read minds?_
- Kinda...
  - Given a restricted set of inputs, an algorithm can be trained and understand which of the inputs the brain is seeing

- Conscious brain activity requires _synchronized, complex, coordinated activity across brain regions_

- Selective attention and multitasking
  - Multitasking, the idea of simultaneous attention to two different things, isn't possible
    - We just rapidly shift attention back and forth
- <u>Cocktail party effect</u>
  - Our ability to selectively focus on the conversation we're in, despite a loud party of many conversations
  - We also have the ability to select for "important" things (i.e., your name) 
- Airline pilots example
  - Pilots were supposed to land in Minneapolis
    - Pilots were multitasking and missed air-traffic controller trying to get their attention
    - Missed their destination by 100 miles.
    - Failed at multitasking
- TV and Internet
  - Participants switched attention between the two in a 28-minute period over 120 times.
- Texting and Driving in teens
  - More than half accidents were caused by being distracted by phone or passengers
- Hands-free driving
  - Harm from hands-free driving systems can harm driving ability as much as drunk driving

- <u>inattentional blindness</u>
  - Our five sense take in 11,000,000 bits of info per second
  - We consciously attend to just 40 bits of info /second (Wilson, 2002)
  - How do we decide what to focus on?
    - Things we think are important
    - Things that might indicate threats or rewards
- <u>Iconic Memory</u>
  - a visual sensory store
  - allows for experiencing a scene without having to reset taking in info each time you blink
  - 

- Parallel vs. Sequential processing
  - Things you've practiced can become parallel. New tasks might have to be parsed through sequentially
- Altered states of consciousness
  - Sleep, hypnosis, medication
- Sleep
  - Periodic, natural state of unconsciousness
  - Why do we sleep?
    - Sleep protects us
      - Evolutionarily, it's safer to hide at night when it's dangerous to go out at night
      - Helps us recuperate
        - Important for muscles, immune system
      - Helps to restore and rebuild memories
      - Feeds creative thinking
      - Supports growth
        - 